Initially let us say straight away from HDA thank you to Heritage Lottery Wales
for supporting us and enabling us to do this short series of podcasts about
Tiger Bay, Bute Town. This is part two of our conversation with Peter Phillips
jazz musician and well one of the hearts that actually drives Tiger Bay. One of
the projects we did I did with HDA Horn Development Association which is Steve
Kyra and Mohammed and and I copied 1700 Siemens identity cards and these are
these are 1921 because yeah conveniently Peter all of the identity cards for
World War one were destroyed by the government in 1919 the same year we had
the race riots in the bay strange that and yeah and but after these identity
cards I've got pictures and I and I tell you for about six months I had loads of
people inquiring you know what it's my so-and-so on now you know whatever people
from Canada from all over the world and I was sending them a picture from the
eye from the identity card of their grandfather some great-grandfathers and
the thing about them which people everyone who said looked at everyone who
looked at them said took their breath away in these cards they were always
smart in these pictures there was no reason they needed to dress up for that
picture it was just an identity thing for the ship
Oh what do you mean every every Friday night a Saturday night every man in the
bay had a trilbiathlon and it's tight a thicky book patent shoes everybody was
shocked and that's the way you were brought up everybody was shocked you
said you said you was a counselor only Southampton what part of Southampton were you?
St Mary's
St Mary's yeah yeah
for about three months I lived in Amble
ah right yeah yeah but that that was before the nothing not with the bridge
before he went across on the ferry yeah yeah
to Amble yes it's a it's a small world they did a program the other month here
about black miners yeah black men have been all over the world yeah and I gotta say I watched
that program that was the um Cardiff footballer yeah yeah yeah and I thought and that's that's who
you can come up with my grand my granddad was a miner yeah I thought he was poor because I knew
quite a few men who were miners it's like after the um the west indians had settled in Cardiff
yeah they were all lumberjacks up in Scotland but it but you know Peter it's like the guys who
went through the first world war on the ships like my granddad did my man my nan said to him
you ain't going you ain't going again you ain't going to war it on the ships during war again
so second world war they everybody moved up to Geckley Gare and they were working on the mines
working on the mines so loads loads of black Caribbean particularly merchant seamen
were up the valleys so correct did not be able to come up with any I just thought with two or three
I thought that was poor that was like a lack of asking people you you know because you've done
yourself if you're going to do something do it with a good research I don't bother at all
yeah that's my feeling if you're going to do it at least what I'm interested in is invisible history
you know what exactly what I mean and that's that's our history it's invisible it's inconvenient
so to just come up with two or three that's feeding the people who don't really want to know
about us well yeah because as you see I mean I was I was amazed because he didn't go far
he didn't go far he didn't go down he didn't go down the Swansea valley I mean I'm now I'm
now living I'm now living in my steg you know oh yeah bridge M way yeah and I walked up the road
guy there who's really nice guy in my steg in the Kyra pit which he would have been up the road from
me for Jamaicans or former merchant seaman he said and that's he said he said I watched that
program and I thought what have you done you you're not even asked anybody you ask any miner in the
valleys over 60 or over 70 they'll name two or three guys they knew exactly exactly like that
and they knew and liked not just you know it's not about you know racism whatever else
people they knew and liked but you see as I said to you he never even went down the Swansea valley
to check out people and you've got to go if you're going to make a program like that and he's not
somebody who's not known he's a well-known player he's a well-known reporter the self of his echo
I just thought he was poor I was kept on saying to myself he haven't asked so and so and he
haven't asked this person yeah and I thought well it's not for me to tell him what to go and ask
I mean that that's what strikes me it was lazy it was lazy the idea is good and it needs doing
it in my generation in the 50s and 60s you've never you've never had no blacks working on the
on the dock on the wet dock you had no blacks working there it was family after family was all
white yeah as I say to you when when you when you think about they talk about this black lives matter
fewer discrimination they wouldn't allow you in the ducks conservative club they wouldn't allow you
in green town conservative club and one of the sweetest stories I ever heard
was a colored gentleman that I knew personally who went to the docks conservative club in other
street and they said he wasn't allowed he wasn't welcome to when he pulled out his affiliation card
of being a member in rummy conservative club the quiet went the club went quiet
and he said no put me out he didn't put him out but these are people that's what I say to you
you always you're the same old cliche oh my best friend is so soft yeah and I used to say to him
you wouldn't like him marrying your daughter and they used to go quiet
they go quiet tell it like it is it's true but you you mentioned the place that I probably enjoyed
I used to go to regular was my stay yeah because my stay got a nice little nice little nightclub
there four sevens it was a regular place to go and uh it was well we always I played with we are
lower valleys and we was always made welcome because as you said there was black miners up
there were you playing for the kayaks then peter yep yep they yeah there is no way you go in the
valleys on any rugby any rugby club whether you know the major ones all the small ones
you mentioned the kayaks and all of them their faces light up and they say hardest game I ever
played but the best night I ever had yeah and the best thing about it was one of the reason
the main reasons that we played up the valleys or regular was because we could go into the
pitted bars and have a good shower instead of dragging that old big tumble bath out in your
own house to buy in the cows and that was that was the main reason I was oh there's lovely and
a nice shower you haven't got to drag that big bath out and fill it with hot water and then empty it
so that's why and as I said I still got friends from all over the valleys they sent Christmas
cards to and from play rugby in the 50s and 60s and you see this is this is the thing we youngsters
today they don't keep their relationships today no they are it seems to me there's a there's a
chip on the shoulders instead of getting out to meet the people well you know you know you take
you take the work that that Kyra is doing with with the community and give no parcels
he shouldn't be on his own there should be everybody you could drive and come
motorist he'd go in and say Kyra I'm available I'm available I'm available yeah but that's not there
no more it's gone it's gone years ago he'd be intoxicated with cash he'd say no I got plenty
I got plenty I got plenty because everybody would know it's us I've been letting get on with it
but it's also but it's also Peter years ago say you were 20 years old and you walk into your
into your house you know your mum and dad's house and your mum or your dad would turn around and go
are you helping them with the food stuff do you know what I mean it wouldn't be just you it would
be the expectation from family that you make you do your shift you make your contribution
yeah well you go as I as I told you in in the far east and late 40s and 50s all the children
my age boys and girls we'd all be out giving out these leaflets for galang around the streets
and and you just did it because your parents would say right tonight when you come to school
I'm gonna see you do this you do that and then I mean I didn't know what she meant she used to say
oh I'm going to the city off of the cult I never knew what she's talking about yeah that's how
they were with the labor party at the time you know of elections and stuff yeah but no what you
what you just said is correct you were not to be told you would go and ask yeah can you do something
you know I mean they say about looking out for neighbors we did that all through the 40s and 50s
check on Mrs. So-so check I remember getting sent to Lermont's a shopping town and getting the penny
I dare not tell my brother I had the penny because she said I was being rude I said oh I did the job
man you're not gonna complain I said I'm a miserable lady give me a penny
I didn't want to whack across the head you know you shouldn't you shouldn't be taking money for it
you're supposed to be you know I know exactly what you're talking about if you don't take it
you're doing wrong again for you I know that's it but what you're saying what you're saying is
right I mean you could you could go down to the party and you meet people who knew your parents
and you were part of the family yeah you know how many times do you know gosh just growing up
I'd get up in the morning going to school and there'd be three or four men that's crashed down
who've come down from Jardy land and was going to join the ship and my brother was a cook on
but they stayed there because the ship hadn't come in yet and that was that was part of it
yeah you know you never said right it's seven and six for bed and breakfast everybody at
everybody and everybody went to see you know it and the thing and the thing was Peter as you know
as my as my nan used to say you know it's an old saying but what goes around comes around yeah
but no one would want you to make you feel like you were having a hard time
exactly exactly it's like a few years ago it's it's gone now that they you you must have known
about it the mons steward pub yeah of course right well on the corner where the lights is obviously
the bank now there was a friend of mine on the corner there and I was going I had my son
with me in a car I think it was about 11 so I stopped the car and I said turn the window down
and I called his friend the man I said to my son give him this just give it to him so I give him a
fiber I give it to him and we drove up we should we could do that for that I said but you see that
corner there it's called penniless point I said and that friend of mine there he comes over from
sea he looks for grammy to make sure that I don't need anything and that was a few drinks
for the Chinese for the meal I said so I'm just reciprocating I said when you see somebody there
that you know he's either waiting for the ship or waiting for work I said so that fiber can take
him in get himself a pack of bags in the punch yeah oh he said oh but you see that's all gone
no ship in the moon there's no seaman it's it's hard to think of what was when you see all them
as you would remember all them ships waiting in barry road to come into caradoc walk and walk
across we can walk across barry dock we used to walk across barry dock on ships yeah yeah
with someone trying to chase us off the boats
every time I talk to somebody like you about penny and it brings all the sweet memories I had
in that chain locker if you I'll tell you what I spoke to a guy after I did another thing
I spoke to a guy whose granddad had been to see this guy is in South Africa right and and he you
know white guy is in South Africa and he said to me you're doing research he said and I wasn't I
was doing you know this kind of thing and I said yeah and he said my granddad said and I didn't I
don't understand it my granddad said if you haven't been thrown out the chain locker you
haven't been to see and I had to explain it to him I said he's right it's a rite of passage
people arrive from all over the world they act to be and they almost begged to be thrown out
you know he tried to kill thompson street but you can't you can't kill memories you can't you can't
you can't everybody everybody in Wales knows bute street in the dark yes no matter where you go
that's right it's no and and the other thing about as I say to you is that when they come down the
bay now and they think it's marvelous it's marvelous they haven't seen the bay they they haven't seen
the bay and it's sad because they come down here and what they don't realize is that the bay was a
flush area when you you and you go look at them buildings down by the pier right beautiful yeah
beautiful buildings and and even where you was brought up with up in barry barry was a lovely
a thriving place thompson street I can remember all the old pictures and everything else thompson
street was like the nearest example is pictures of san francisco in the gold boom you know what I
mean they might have been wooden houses but they was high and they was splendid and then they just
cut them down yeah I beat the san francisco yeah but I just said to you earlier on in a conversation
if if they would have done for him always is in louton square yeah you'd have been looking like
nothing else they were beautiful houses with the railings around it was beautiful that's exactly
the example that comes to mind repeat not in ill or islint in or stoke newington yeah those
altis are now selling for three four million and the other thing about it see you nor I nor Kyra
never had a chance to buy property because we never had the money so you you you see that's
how outsiders got to come and do things but I've always said it them houses in louton square
especially the ones opposite the church they could have been made in the luxury flats
philis philis keeps at the back where the lane is and it could have been luxurious but get them
down get them down get them down and it was and they've done it all over the place they killed
newtown they killed butown they called it crippled grahamstone nobody wants to make this as part of
card if they so I don't know honestly I don't know where we're going to go there's only one common
common thing about all of those and then you can include grangetown is the people
yeah yeah you know it's got to be about knocking down the people yeah and now you're going to work